<!--
vim: tw=70
SPDX-License-Identifier: (CC-BY-SA-4.0 OR GFDL-1.3-or-later)
Copyright 2018 Nick Howell
-->

# RFP: Projects in Natural Language Processing

<div style="column-width: 30em">

The Instructors of the 2018 HSE course Компьютерная Лингвистика
announce this Request for Proposals for projects in natural language
processing.

Applicants will submit proposals to conduct, with guidance from the
Instructors, an engineering, survey, or scientific project in the
field of natural language processing. Projects will culminate in a
written report due at the end of the course. Evaluation will be
performed by the Instructors according to a set of criteria outlined
in the accepted proposals.

The closing for the submission of proposals is 23:59:59 UTC on
Tuesday, October 30, 2018.

## Proposal format

Proposals should be written in English, Russian, or a Romance
language, and contain six sections:

0. Abstract
1. Introduction
2. Proposed goals
3. Requirements
4. Timelines
4. Data policy
5. References

The abstract should contain a one-paragraph summary of the rest of the
proposal.

The introduction should briefly describe the background of the problem
to be solved or topic to be studied, with references for the
low-background reader.

Proposed goals should be included, starting with a minimum viable
product (MVP). The minimum viable product is the smallest possible
goal, and is the base criterion for determining project success. At
least three goals should be included: minimal viable product, expected
product (EP), and high-achievement product (HAP). Ideal proposals will
have highly attainable MVP, plausible EP, and HAP resulting in
material which can be presented at academic conferences or published
in academic journals.

The requirements section breaks each goal into sub-goals. Each
sub-goal should be labeled with a brief list of anticipated skills
required, with references for skills not already possessed by
Applicants. 

For each goal of MVP, EP, and HAP, a timeline should be given
terminating with that goal and a written report at the end of the
course. Each timeline should have a schedule of deadlines for all
sub-goals, so that progress can be tracked and completion of goals can
be projected.

The data policy section should describe the policy for data
collection, algorithm and analysis design, software development, and
paper writing, including how and to whom the intermediate and final
states will be made available. Applicants should keep in mind that the
program is committed to "open science" methodology.

References should be included where appropriate, but is not expected
to be comprehensive.

## Proposal evaluation

Proposals will be evaluated for relevance to natural language
processing, suitability of goals, scope of requirements, plausibility
of timelines, and transparency of data policy.

## Submission of applications

Applications may be submitted in PDF or CommonMark format; commit your
application in the 2018-komp-ling/projects folder of ftyers.github.io
and submit a pull-request on GitHub.

</div>
